Title: Inequality is in the Air
Date: 2017-12-16 17:40
Tags: Inequality, Politics, Flying, Airlines 
Summary: It's been the time of year for flying. There have been some many advances in the last few years. However, by and large, only those people who inexplicably manage to end up in business class are able to experience them. But what could flying under socialism be like?


![The rich don't have to deal with this when they fly...]({filename}/images/economylounge.jpg)
It's been the time of year for flying. First I travelled from the UK
to a conference and then home to Canada for Christmas. Oh
flying... There have been some many advances in the last few
years. You arrive at the airport to be greeted by friendly staff who
quickly and efficiently check your suitcases. Because you got there
ahead of schedule, you're offered a seat on an earlier flight which
you happily accept. You enjoy quick lines heading through security to
sit down in a comfortable chair to wait to board. On the plain you
stow your carry-on in the ample space and settle down into a roomy,
state-of-the-art seat with ample leg-room, specifically designed to
make it easy to sleep. Flight attendants offer you drinks and take you
through the gourmet menu for the trip. As you take off you look
through the large selection of complimentary entertainment options
which will keep you occupied throughout the flight. You arrive at your
destination rested and well-fed and give the crew a genuine thanks for
the service. Lines at border control are short and your luggage
arrives at the carousel immediately.

Of course, for most of us this description could hardly be more
different from our actual travel experience. In fairness, in-flight
entertainment has massively improved, even for economy passengers, at
least on some airlines. And many airports do have very efficient
check-in or security systems (although I don't think I can come up
with one which has _both_ of these). However, by and large, only those
people who inexplicably manage to end up in business class (tickets
for which tend to be at least 4 times more expensive than economy)
have the sort of experience I described.

There has always been business class service which offers a
better experience for those able to pay, but in the past both the
price and service differentials were smaller. Over the past decade ore
two we have seen massive strides forward in business and first class
service: priority lines to go through security, priority lines to go
through border control (and believe me, for a non-EU traveller in
Heathrow this is a _big_ benefit), noise-cancelling headphones, seats
which convert into lie-flat beds, premium airline lounges at an
ever-larger number of destinations, the list goes on. Airlines show
luxurious pictures of these facilities in their marketing, despite the
fact that only a tiny percentage of passengers will ever get to use
them.

As for the rest of us... Fees have been added to services which used
to be included in the ticket price, such as having the ability to
change flights, choosing your seats, checking bags, having a pillow on
board, and being served a meal. On those flights where complimentary
food is served, meal size and quality has gone down
dramatically. Discount airlines go even further, charging for such
luxuries as a carry-on bag and printing a physical boarding
pass. Seats remain essentially unchanged from 40 years ago except that
legroom has decreased and, on some of the big planes, they've gotten
narrower thanks to the addition of an extra one in each row. In-flight
service is offered is slower and less efficient than before, with the
number of flight attendants cut. Fare structures have become
increasingly incomprehensible and it has gotten even more difficult to
accumulate enough frequent-flyer miles to be treated with some
baseline level of decency. These changes also have a toll on
operational efficiency. For example, with so many people now carrying
luggage on board, flights are delayed as people fight for space in
overhead bins and staff find themselves having to police carry-on
allowances.

What we've seen is ever-increasing inequality in air travel. The rich
get richer with new perks and amenities. On some airlines this is
taken to truly ludicrous levels, with the offering of limousine
service to first class passengers and exclusive terminals. The poor
get poorer with fewer and fewer services offered and more and more
ancillary charges. Some argue that service may have declined but at
least flying is cheaper than ever. I'm not so sure. I strongly suspect
that if you included all of the extra fees needed to get what used to
be standard levels of service and ticket flexibility then tickets
would be as expensive as ever.

Just as economic inequality has grown over the past 30 years, so too
has inequality in air travel. I expect there is a causal link here. As
some people have become fantastically wealthy they have gained the
means to float through airports in their exclusive bubble of
privilege. Meanwhile, as the incomes of most people have stagnated or
declined, we're stuck with lousy service. But in addition to direct
causality, I believe these trends share a common source. Both have
their origins in neoliberalism. On the one hand, this resulted in a
weakened labour movement, a strengthened capitalist class, a rise in
outsourcing, and a reduced social wage, preventing most people from
sharing in the gains of growth. On the other hand, it has resulted in
privatisation and deregulation of airlines and airports, as well as
increased international competition from open sky
agreements. Neoliberalism helped ruin flying.

Let's fight back! Nationalise the airways! Fewer seats, more leg room,
cheaper tickets for all! Eliminate economy class! Would that it were
that simple. There is no way that flying would be affordable for the
great majority of people if everyone had current first/business class
seating. There will always be a tension between making flying cheap
for everyone and making it of decent quality of everyone. Furthermore,
flying is a major source of greenhouse gases and one without any
immediate prospect of fixing. Ecologically, it is currently in our
interest to cram as many people into an airplane as possible, while
ensuring that as few airplanes are flying as possible.

![One idea of how to improve economy seats, with enough arm-rest space for everyone and a nicer middle seat.]({filename}/images/innovativeEconomy.jpg)
By all means, nationalise and merge the airlines. It would allow
national planning and optimisation of the network as a whole, along
with a greater choice of flights. There would no longer be a need to
introduce hidden fees so as to appear cheaper than the competition. We
could restore a number of services which are relatively inexpensive
and have little environmental impact. But we must not build our
transport policy on simple populist grounds.

Where practical, we'll have to replace flying with rail, which is more
comfortable anyway. We'll also have to research alternatives to jet
fuel. Meanwhile, let's equalise the flying experience! Strip out the
absurd first class seats and give a little bit more space in
economy. Bring back decent in-flight meals (with real table-wear,
please!), a complimentary checked bag, pillows and blankets on short
haul flights, and hot towel service. Invest some R&D into making
economy seats more comfortable while still affordable. Get rid of
priority lines at airports and bring in some extra staff so that
everyone can be processed efficiently and make the seats by the gates
a bit more comfortable.

Perhaps under fully automated luxury communism everyone will
experience first class levels of comfort. Until then, let's at least
eliminate the inequities of flying and make flying under socialism a
vaguely human experience.
