Title: Oxford & District Labour Party AMM September 2017
Date: 2017-09-08 23:00
Tags: Labour Party, British Politics, Meetings


[Timings for this meeting]({filename}/attachments/PoliticsMeetings/2017-09-08-amm/agenda.docx) and
[minutes from last meeting]({filename}/attachments/PoliticsMeetings/2017-09-08-amm/prev-amm-minutes.docx) passed
without comment. There was one piece of urgent business, with a city
councillor reminding us about the Oxford Living Wage Campaign and
asking us all to show up to the launch.


## Parliamentary Report

Anneliese thanks us for our help in the election and for continued
campaigning. She mentioned that she thinks the Tories have dug in for
awhile, so we'll have to stick with the campaigning. Also
congratulated the council election result in Didcot.

### Brexit

Felt government's position hasn't improved over summer and continues
to alienate partners. Reminded us Labour's position is to have an
interim agreement so that the UK won't fall off a cliff. In the
meantime, Labour is pressing the Tories for details and votes in the
house of commons. Not accepting the government rewriting
labour/environmental laws without discussion. Criticised government
for saying Electric Mini production in the UK is vote of confident in
EU negotiations--it's a testament to the quality of the workforce. For
long-term sustainability need a sensible trade relationship.

### Tax Issues

Called out the government for continuing to tax redundancy payment
while giving further concessions for non-doms. On the first there will
be a vote but without any debate. Feels government is weak on this,
with only 2 MPs willing to defend finance bill in the commons. Thinks
Labour can push them on this.

### Housing

Knows this is important to local activists. Post-Grenfall we were told
would be an open debate on social housing, but it hasn't happened. The
government still hasn't changed its views on regulations. Is afraid
Tories will push ahead forcing housing associations to sell
properties. Notes developers in Oxford salivating. Affordability is
still defined too narrowly. Roll-out of Universal Credit is shambolic
and could mean people will lose access to housing benefit.

### Questions

Government trying to manipulate committees so they have a majority and
also timing of committees. Seems to be an attempt to avoid
scrutiny. When asked if anything we can do she only referred to work
of MPs.

Anneleise confirmed reduction in seats in parliament doesn't seem to
be happening. This would have particularly hurt Labour. Not sure why
government stepped away from this. (Ann heard DUP won't have it
because would give Sinn Fein extra seats.) Will still be a boundary
review. Will be some changes about parties registering which will make
things more difficult for Labour.

On questions of unity in PLP, she said she always seems to get on with
everyone. Wasn't there when things were tense, so that might
help. Says atmosphere remains good and hopes it will continue. In
particular, hopes it will continue through Conference. If focus can
stay on policies while Tories tear themselves apart then that will put
Labour in a good position.

Reiterated that doesn't see the government falling soon. Majorities
typically around 14, which will be hard to break. Was asked about
detailed policy work says trying to strike a balance between
developing detailed policies and keeping focus on broad goals
(i.e. keeping in election footing). Felt good progress being made in
some parts of the party and reported that shadow Treasury team
continues to engage with all relevant stakeholders.

I asked how members can get more involved with policy, mentioning that
NPF reports are vague and have no content. She didn't respond to my
question, instead focusing on other questions asked in my tranche (see
next paragraph).

Expressed concern about international situation (refugees, etc.). Felt
hasn't been sufficient response in Britain. Reports Labour has been
doing some work on specific issues (such as persecution of Muslims in
Burma). Highlighted insufficient support given to refugees. Wants to
be sure it doesn't get lost in debate. Agreed with a member that it's
important for party to stand up against hate crime. Called out Sarah
Champion and worried it's distracting from real issues of child abuse,
etc. Expressed worry about Islamophobia which has gotten worse since
referendum. Is glad community in Oxford has tended to stand against
any attempt to stir racism etc. up here.

Expressed concern over academics making homophobic comments. Doesn't
know what was said but feels if students were upset enough to complain
then comments would have to be unacceptable. Equivocated a bit over
vice-chancellor's high pay. Seemed to be saying she's concerned with
this being used as a way to claim universities awash with money when
aren't.

Confirmed will continue her work around tax transparency and tackling
tax avoidance. Will bring this up with finance bill next week. Wants
to tighten rules for non-doms and to tackle money laundering, which
Britain is becoming something of a centre for.

Worker brought up BMW's recent settlement of a pension dispute by
essentially changing a contract. Asked if anything she could do to
help from parliament, particularly if Labour forms government. She
felt would be difficult to resolve situation under current
legislation--will need to be changed. Could potentially become
relevant in context of Brexit. Reminded us this will take a fight.

Expressed concern about government position on immigration. Doesn't
like how Tories have made this a big issue. Said Britain has low
unemployment and needs immigrants to fill a wide range of jobs of
varying levels of skills. Feels like immigration system for non-EU
citizens isn't working for immigrants, businesses, public services,
etc.

Was asked about housing development with very expensive flats. As not
in local government she could only make general comments. Said she
understands it is difficult for local authorities to force developers
to include affordable housing under current law. Hopes new
infrastructure commission for Oxford-Cambridge corridor will allow new
investment in housing, transport, public services in the area.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Also see provided handout from Anneliese.

## Annual Conference

### Women's Confernce Arrangement Committee

Delegates for Women's Conference not present. Branch delegates chose
who they want our conference delegates to vote for on the
committee. Chair expressed extreme displreasure that that women's
delegates absent. Was some protest from the floor that there were
extenuating circumstances.

### Resolutions

Can send two resolutions (one from each constituency). First debate
motions and vote on whether we support them. Then, if all three pass,
choose which ones to prioritise.

#### Ending UK support for Saudi Arabia

John Tanner spoke on importance of ending attack on Yemen and increase
pressure on Suadi's. Reminded us that motions must be contemporary and
feels recent UN report means this one is. Resolution also refers to
arms conversion to protect jobs in the UK arms industry. Unite has put
out report on past proposals and successful conversions. No one spoke
against, vote unanimous except for one abstention.

#### A publicly owned banking system

Calls for nationalising and democratically controlling large
banks. Said was good thing that Labour bailed out banks, but wasn't
enough control and bad how resulted in austerity. Points out bad
behaviour of Loyd's and RBS while large stakes held by state. Similar
motion being raised in Leeds. Feels this will continue developing
manifesto. Contemporary because final shares in Loyd's just recent sold
off. One person spoke against saying it's not a priority (costs lots of
money). Also said looks like there might be another crash and better
wipe-out private equity than public (plus would make cheaper if then
want to nationalise). Felt connection between ownership and control
insufficiently dealt with in motion. Another person spoke about it
being an obvious policy. Someone else pointed out we'd be better off
trying to stop another crash (via nationalisation) and that the public
is on the hook anyway when private equity is lost. Ann Black thought
incoming Labour government will have too much to do without running
banking system. Politicians are not bankers. Not a priority.

28 for, 15 against, 26 abstentions by my count. Committee agreed it
was carried but not by majority.

#### NHS and Accountable Care System

Liz said described how new Accountable Care System (ACS) bundles all
health commissioners etc. in an area and takes it away from public
scrutiny. These are equivalent to HMOs in United States and will make
things ripe for privatisation. Also current move to sell off NHS
properties which must be opposed. We need these properties to provide
for increased care needs. Highlighted this is needed for next 20
years, not next 2. Motion based on one forwarded by Socialist Health
Association. Seconder reminded of need for more money and for all
Labour officials to oppose any cuts. One person felt there could be
good debate for centralising certain services (based on medical issues
rather than saving money) and worried this motion goes too far in
blanket opposition. Another person said will abstain because arguments
not based on studies of outcomes. Overwelmingly carried with only a
few abstentions.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Then we could each cast two votes for which resolutions to submit. I
voted for bank nationalisation and the NHS motion. Was clear NHS and
Suadi Arabia ones were far more popular---only a few people voted for
bank nationalisation.

----------------------------------------------------------------

Someone spoke for continued membership of the Single Market. Hoped
delegates would raise it at conference.  Another speaker said she
thinks Kier Starmer's stated position more realistic.

### National Constitutional Committee election

This seemed to be up to branch delegates.

### Constitutional Amendments

Lots to go through so Ann said we could just leave it to delegate's
judgement. Ann's recommendations in
[her report]({filename}/attachments/PoliticsMeetings/2017-09-08-amm/rulechanges.docx) were available. The floor
thanked Ann for her work. One person wanted us to take a position on
the McDonnell Amendment. May not come to a vote and instead be pushed
towards other reforms. This was defeated by small margin. Ann a bit
irritated that a lot of people voting to leave things to the delegates
last time wanted all of the debated (hence prompting her to go to the
effort of putting together a large document).

## Motion on Hate Crimes

Increase in hate crimes over last year, especially towards
Muslims. Women afraid to go out. Oxford East motion to bring back
Commission of Racial Equality with authority to investigate hate
crimes. Passed with overwhelming support and no extensions.

## Minutes of Executive Committee

Have minutes of [July executive committee]({filename}/attachments/PoliticsMeetings/2017-09-08-amm/exec-meeting-minutes.docx).

## Future Meetings

Next meeting October 13 with delegates reporting back from conference.
