Title: With Climate Change, Everything Relates to Everything
Date: 2018-11-20 22:00
Author: C MacMackin
Tags: Energy, Electricity, British Politics, Nationalisation, Planning
Summary:
Status: draft

<!--_I wrote this article for the_ New Socialist _website, where
[it appeared](https://newsocialist.org.uk/ownership-and-markets-energy/)
on 16 April 2018 with a few changes._-->

During this year's conference, the Labour Party
[made headlines](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2018/sep/24/labour-wants-green-energy-to-power-most-uk-homes-by-2030-greenhouse-gas-emissions)
with its seemingly bold promises on energy and climate change. These
included massive build-out of wind turbines, solar panels, and a
housing retrofit program. We were promised that these pledges would be
elaborated on in a report to be released that weekend. However, said
report proved to be woefully inadequate in terms of what we need to
tackle climate change, as will be revealed in the summary and
discussion below. Despite the apparent magnitude of its program,
Labour still has not truly grasped the scale of the task of
confronting climate change. Doing so will require marshalling all of
the country's technical expertise into a plan involving industry,
labour, and local, regional, and national levels of government.

## What's in the Report

The report opens with a one-page overview explaining that it sets out
key findings of research into how to achieve Labour’s 2017 commitment
to get 60% of the UK’s electricity and heat from renewable and
low-carbon sources. This research focuses on “the scale and scope of
technologies required for Labour to meet the 60% target”. Future work
will consider the concrete actions needed to achieve it. It states
that this work is merely to provide information and “does not
represent Labour Party policy”. A number of “industry professionals
and experts ... from right across the energy sector” who contributed
to the document are listed.

Rebecca Long-Bailey (Shadow Secretary for Business, Energy, and
Industrial Strategy) provides a forward. Most of this is fairly
vacuous, simply indicating that Labour is determined to address
climate change in an equitable manner. She reaffirms Labour’s policy
of net zero emissions by 2050 and pledges Labour will ensure “60 per
cent of the UK’s energy comes from renewable and low carbon sources
within twelve years of coming to power.” This contradicts statements
made elsewhere which said the 60% target applied only to electricity
and heat.

The single longest portion of the report is the introduction, which
makes it clear that this document is only a “briefing note”. A “full
report, to be published later in the year ... will set out our
intended pathways for upgrading the whole energy system, including
other electricity generation technologies, UK heating and our approach
for non-domestic buildings”. The introduction goes on to claim that
“Britain has the best opportunities for renewable energy of almost any
country in the world” and explains that the current paper will look at
“four key elements” of Labour’s plans: energy efficiency, offshore
wind, onshore wind, and solar power.

Many short-term benefits of such a policy are described: eliminating
fuel poverty (and improved well-being that results), cleaner air,
eliminating “the obscene wastefulness of our current, high-polluting
energy system”, and energy security for “decades to come” with
protection from fluctuations in fuel prices. This will be achieved by
reducing heating demand by 23% and producing 85% of electricity and
44% of heat from renewable sources. Such actions are estimated to
create 410,000 jobs, will require massive infrastructure renewal, and
will affect “almost all [non-energy] sectors”. These steps will allow
the UK to meet its commitments under the Paris Agreement. We are
reassured that, despite the intermittency of wind and solar power,
“the lights will stay on” and that “this paper shows that even a
limited selection of the cost-effective technical solutions available
today would be more than sufficient” to do this.

The report proposes installing 4GW of new offshore wind capacity every
year through the 2020s, resulting in a total of 52GW installed. This
will allow the UK to harness “the largest wind resource in Europe”,
taking advantage of falling costs and new technologies. It is
mentioned that offshore wind works well to offset lower solar power in
winter. It is estimated that, by sourcing components from domestic
suppliers, this policy would result in the creation of 120,000
jobs. There is a further proposal to bring installed onshore wind
capacity to 30GW by 2030, taking advantage of cheaper building costs
than offshore wind and a “low footprint”. This is expected to create
an additional 60,000 jobs.

On solar power, the report suggests increasing installed capacity to
35GW by 2030, installing 2.2GW per year and creating 70,000 jobs. It
is noted that capacity has grown massively since 2010, despite a
slowdown due to “actions of the Tory government”. While installations
were initially small scale, it is noted that larger installations now
dominate.

Finally, it is proposed to cut domestic heat demand by about one
quarter by 2030 by upgrading buildings to the highest standards of
efficiency (as well as making non-energy related improvements), with
24 million homes upgraded by 2030. Higher energy standards will be
enforced for all new homes. In addition to addressing climate change,
this policy will improve energy poverty and quality of
life. Efficiency is noted as being vital to meet the 60% target, given
the large amount of heating currently used and difficulty in shifting
to renewable heat. This project will “require a scale of investment,
supply chain capacity building and innovation as yet unseen in
post-war Britain” and would create 160,000 jobs.

### Problems

Though described as a summary, the above is a fairly complete
reproduction of the actual content present in this 14 page report. No
citations or arguments were given for any of the claims made. I am
left wondering what the point of this document was, given how little
information it actually contained.

The first issue we must address is what sectors the 60% clean energy
target applies to. The manifesto simply pledged to “ensure that 60 per
cent of the UK’s energy comes from zero-carbon or renewable sources by
2030”, but this document (except the comments made by Rebecca
Long-Bailey) claims this referred only to electricity and
heating. However, together these make up less than half of current UK
energy consumption. This represents a massive retreat by Labour.

The relationship between “zero carbon” and “renewable” sources is also
unclear. The plans presented in this document are for 60% renewable
(electric and heating) energy by 2030. Are we to take “zero carbon” to
just be a synonym for “renewable”, then? If so, what do we make of
biomass which, while renewable, even the most generous estimates show
emitting some greenhouse gases. Jeremy Corbyn  has indicated that
nuclear will also make up part of the zero-carbon energy mix. Even
existing reactors are not shown in this paper’s plans for 2030 (let
alone the new ones Labour supposedly supports). Do the authors not
think we need them? Whatever one’s stance on nuclear energy, Labour
members deserve a frank and forthright discussion of how it fits into
climate change plans.

If existing hydro and biomass capacity is included, then the proposed
new wind and solar installations would produce the promised amount of
renewable electricity. However, that’s only a small part of the
battle. The real challenge will be to achieve “system integration”,
allowing the lights to remain on when the wind isn’t blowing. These
problems are dismissed as easily solved, with no explanation of
how it would be done. It would likely be possible to do this for 60%
renewable electricity, but gas plants would be needed for
backup. Rather than just looking at the requirements for 60% renewable
energy, as this paper claims to do, we need to think about how we’ll
actually achieve 100% clean energy. Otherwise we could lock ourselves
into dependence on fossil fuels in the medium term.

No explanation is given of what will provide the 44% renewable
heat. Electricity and hydrogen are mentioned. However, all existing
and proposed renewable installations will be needed to meet targets
for existing electricity demand. Hydrogen takes energy to produce and
this is not budgeted for either.

There are a number of other issues I could also challenge this paper
on, but I will end here for reasons of space. As the authors say, we
urgently need a plan to address climate change. It is a shame,
therefore, that they have not provided us with one. Hopefully they
will do so in the full report but, if so, I don’t see why this
document was released.

Finally, we need to consider the way in which this report was
written. Of the 10 authors, Googling revealed details on 8 of
them. One of these is an academic researcher, another is a policy
analyst at Ofgem, and the rest are energy or climate change
consultants. All of the consultants work for the same company
(Arup). One of the remaining two may run a business installing solar
panels, but I’m not sure. All things considered, this seems like a
less-than-diverse pool of expertise. Why weren’t the unions involved?
What about people who work at power plants, build wind farms, or do
load balancing for National Grid? Even beyond exactly who was chosen
to write this report, given the weakness of its arguments and how
little effort was made to distribute it to members, it feels like
policy is being formed by small groups of leadership-appointed
experts. This is a far cry from the membership-led policy formation
which Jeremy Corbyn promised when he was elected leader.

### The Missing Ingredient: Politics

This report and, it seems, the full version of it which is to
come,deals with technical, rather than political questions. In and of
itself, this is fine; Labour needs to ensure its policies are grounded
in what is technologically feasible. However, we mustn't lose sight of
the political aspects of these issues, either. Political assumptions
inform the context in which technical discussions take place. For
example, anti-nuclear activists often argue that this technology only
receives consideration due to its compatibility with centralised
government and big business. Conversely, its more left wing supporters
suggest that nuclear power appears artificially expensive due
to privatisation. The technical and political are linked, forming a
dialectic which we must navigate. 

The most obvious case of missing politics is the paper's support for
rooftop solar panels. Their installation in uncritically treated as a
good thing, without any consideration of who benefits. To date this
has largely been well-off property owners, who've received a subsidy
paid for by other electricity consumers. Labour seems to want solar
panels to also be placed on rental property, which begs the question
of who will benefit? It's hard to imagine how the tenant could be the
one to finance the panels, but it's the landlord who's paying for them
then presumably it would also be the landlord receiving the government
subsidy (either directly or through increased rent). We thus see how
politics can very quickly infringe upon technical plans. Rather than
examine these issues, the paper ignores them. It doesn't even question
whether solar subsidies have been a gift to the well-to-do and
indicates that they should be increased to the levels that existed
prior to Tory changes.

As Labour continues its work on energy policy, it is vital that it
considers exactly how it wishes to organise ownership of the
sector. To date it seems to have endorsed a plurality of structures,
consisting of regional, local, personal, and cooperative ownership. I
have, in the past,
[criticised this approach](https://newsocialist.org.uk/ownership-and-markets-energy/)
and will not repeat myself here. However, even the proponents of such
a system acknowledge the need to abolish the energy market and provide
some sort of national guidance. Yet we have been given no indication
of what form this might take, by Labour or anyone else.

Probably the closest this paper comes to truly considering the
political implications of its proposals is when it says about its
energy efficiency measures that "This level of ambition represents an
unprecedented transformation of the UK’s housing stock and will
require a scale of investment, supply chain capacity building and
innovation as yet unseen in post-war Britain". This is a fair
assessment, with the task becoming all the more massive when
considering the other policies needed to address climate change. In
short, it would require something on the scale of war-time economic
planning. The problem was that, during the World Wars, the government
could rely on an alliance with business. While capital might not have
liked submitting to government control, it acknowledged that this was
necessary in order to win the war. As national capital would not have
fared well had Britain lost, they had a fairly immediate interest in
cooperating.

Unfortunately, the effects of climate change are sufficiently distant
and diffuse (not to mention, concentrated in the Global South) that
business is unlikely to see the need for such cooperation with public
planners today. This represents a formidable obstacle which, as far as
I'm aware, no one has really considered. I can not confidently propose
a solution to this, other than to say that clearly an incredibly
powerful working class movement, dedicated to an environmental
transition in the economy, will be necessary. Only such a popular
force scare capital into acquiescence or (as I think will likely prove
necessary) actually begin to take public control of key economic
sectors.



##What we Need

TRANSITION, EVERYTHING RELATES TO EVERYTHING

### Plan for Zero-Carbon

WHOLE SOCIETY PLANNING (CARBON BUDGETS)

NATIONAL COMMITTEE DRAWING UP PLANS, WITH REGIONAL AND SECTORAL
COMMITTEES ALSO REPRESENTED

LOCAL AUTHORITIES ALSO NEED TO DRAW UP OWN PLANS WITHIN NATIONAL FRAMEWORK

### Centralising and Decentralising Energy

As I have
[argued in the past](https://newsocialist.org.uk/ownership-and-markets-energy/),
the nature of the electrical system means that a high degree of
centralisation will remain vital in this sector, even if individual
generators become more diffuse. There is no avoiding the fact that a
national authority will be required to plan load balancing and the
correct combination of investments needed to ensure the lights stay
on. The only possible alternative would be the electricity market,
which for a host of reasons is unacceptable to socialists (and in any
case, probably wouldn't work). Some have suggested that it at least
does no harm to allow people to generate some of their own
electricity, but even this isn't entirely true. One utility found that
the revenue lost from widespread adoption of solar panels would be
greater than the reductions in costs of operating the electrical
system, resulting in higher prices overall. CITEME!

While it is true that centralised institutions can, at times, be
alienating, that doesn't _necessarily_ mean that decentralised ones
will be more resistant to privatisation. On a recent panel discussion
hosted by We Own It, Leo Murray (of 10:10) argued that it would be
impossible to privatise the solar panels on the roof of your local
primary school. Given that schools have been known to
sell off their sports grounds (or have been privatised outright, in the
form of academisation), I find this unconvincing. Indeed, attempts to
privatise the NHS have often involved greater decentralisation and
fragmentation of its management, thus breaking it into pieces of a
size more digestable for the private sector to take over.

With all of that said, energy policy will necessarily require local
involvement. In addition to democracy and public participation being
easier at this level, it can help to overcome NIMBYism and to
coordinate more locally-based projects such as the upgrading of
housing stock. Such arguments make the idea of a local authority-owned
grids and energy suppliers attractive. While such suppliers
(purchasing from a public monopoly in generation) do allow for the
level of planning I have called for, they come with their own
issues. First and foremost, the low-voltage grid is currently
organised at the regional scale and it is unclear if it would be
practical to break it up into locally-sized units. Secondly, if such
suppliers are created with the goal of out-competing the Big Six, then
this would represent a threat to (or at least disruption of) the jobs
of existing employees.

Thus, the model I propose would  see the creation of a nationally
owned public utility made out of

- the national grid
- the regional grids
- interconnectors
- zero-carbon generators (except those small enough to
  receive a feed-in tariff)
- energy storage facilities
- the supply divisions of the Big Six

During a transition period, the electricity market would continue to
operate as before, despite most of the components being owned by the
same parent company. Over this time, the newly-nationalised companies
would be fully merged and made to operate as a single,
vertically-integrated enterprise. Contracts would be negotiated with
the remaining fossil fuel power-plants (or imposed by statute, should
that prove necessary) to buy any additional electricity needed to meet
demand from them. All new powerplants would be built in the public
sector and, over time, the public utility would own the vast majority
of generating capacity. If desired, it could also make contracts to
purchase power from locally-owned generators, although I would
generally advise against this as it is likely to increase costs.

Of course, none of this provides for any localism. So, I propose that
each local authority would be charged with creating what I will call a
Local Energy Service Company (LESC). The LESCs would have numerous roles

HEAT, SMART APPLIANCES, PLANNING PROCESS, ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING

### Transport and Housing Developments

ENERGY EFFICIENCY, MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS, HIGH DENSITY

PLANNING LAW MUST ACCOUNT FOR CLIMATE CHANGE

COMBAT CAR = FREEDOM IDEA; TRANSIT = FREEDOM

FREE TRANSIT

SOCIAL HOUSING AROUND NEW TRANSIT LINKS TO PREVENT GENTRIFICATION

ELECTRIC TRANSIT (E.G. TROLLEYBUSES, RAIL ELECTRIFICATION)

FOCUS ON THROUGHPUT, CONNECTIONS, RATHER THAN TOP SPEED

OWNERSHIP LEVEL, PROBLEM OF FRAGMENTED LOCAL AUTHORITIES

WHERE VEHICLES ARE NEEDED, ELECTRIFY IF POSSIBLE

LONG DISTANCE ROAD?

WHAT TO DO ABOUT AVIATION? NIGHT TRAINS? BATTERY PLANES? SYNTHETIC
FUELS?


### Those Other Sectors...

AGRICULTURE: MAXIMISE OUTPUT FROM LAND (INCLUDING RESPONSIBLE USE OF
PESTICIDES, GMOs), MINIMISE EMISSIONS

COMMONLY TOLD WE NEED TO EAT LESS MEAT, BUT HOW TO MAKE PEOPLE DO IT?
GUILT ISN'T POLITICS. CARBON TAX (REGRESSIVE)? HIGH QUALITY PUBLIC
MEAL PROVISION? CENTRALISED GOVERNMENT CATERING, MADE WIDELY
AVAILABLE?

CEMENT AND STEEL NEED FURTHER RESEARCH. IF STEEL NATIONALISED (AS MANY
SUGGESTED WHEN TATA CLOSING DOWN MILL) THEN THIS SHOULD BE A
PRIORITY. ANOTHER POSSIBILITY IS CARBON CAPTURE FOR USE OR
SEQUESTRATION.

NEED PUBLIC R&D (E.G. NICKI ASHTON'S GREEN CANADA PROPOSAL).

LAND USE MUST BE PART OF CARBON BUDGETS.

THINKING ABOUT NEGATIVE EMISSIONS

### The International Dimension

EVEN IF BRITAIN STOPPED ALL EMISSIONS TOMORROW, WON'T DO MUCH GOOD
UNLESS REST OF WORLD FOLLOWED SUIT TOMORROW, THOUGHT EXAMPLE IS
IMPORTANT

MUST PUT PRESSURE ON OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (TRADE SANCTIONS?)

MUST HELP DEVELOPING COUNTRIES: TRADE AGREEMENTS, TECH TRANSFERS,
DEVELOPMENT AID, BUILDING CLIMATE DEFENCES

DEVELOP INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM FOR HANDLING REFUGEES; WILL LIKELY
REQUIRE BUILDING WHOLE NEW CITIES. NEED HUMANE SYSTEM TO MANAGE MASS
MOVEMENTS OF POPULATION, AVOID STIRRING UP HOSTILITY IN FIRST WORLD

GEO-ENGINEERING: NEGATIVE EMISSIONS, POSSIBLY AEROSOLS--REQUIRE
MUTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR DECISION MAKING ON GLOBAL SCALE

## Conclusion

CLIMATE CHANGE IS A CHALLENGE OF A SCALE NEVER BEFORE FACED; CLOSEST
COMPARISON IS TOTAL WAR BUT NOW REQUIRES INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

LEVEL OF CLASS STRUGGLE SIMILARLY UNPRECEDENTED; DIFFICULT TO IMAGINE
ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE WITHOUT SOCIALISM, IMPOSSIBLE TO IMAGINE
MITIGATION WITHOUT AT LEAST SOCIAL DEMOCRACY
