Title: Labour's Energy Plans: Technically Questionable, Politically Vacuous
Date: 2019-04-28 22:00
Author: C MacMackin
Tags: Energy, Electricity, British Politics, Labour Party

During last year's conference, the Labour Party
[made headlines](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2018/sep/24/labour-wants-green-energy-to-power-most-uk-homes-by-2030-greenhouse-gas-emissions)
with its seemingly bold promises on energy and climate change. These
included a massive build-out of wind turbines, solar panels, and a
housing retrofit programme. We were promised that these pledges would
be elaborated on in a report to be released that weekend. However,
[said report](https://www.labour.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Achieving-6025-by-2030-final-version.pdf)
proved to be woefully inadequate in terms of what we need to tackle
climate change, as will be revealed in the summary and discussion
below. Despite the apparent magnitude of its programme, Labour still
has not truly grasped the scale of the task of confronting climate
change.

### What's in the Report

The report opens with a one-page overview explaining that it sets out
key findings of research into how to achieve Labour’s 2017 commitment
to get 60% of the UK’s electricity and heat from renewable and
low-carbon sources. (Note that the exact relationship between these
two types of energy is not made clear in this paper; much heating is
powered by electricity.) This research focuses on “the scale and scope
of technologies required for Labour to meet the 60% target”. Future
work will consider the concrete actions needed to achieve it. It
states that this work is merely to provide information and “does not
represent Labour Party policy”. A number of “industry professionals
and experts ... from right across the energy sector” who contributed
to the document are listed.

Rebecca Long-Bailey (Shadow Secretary for Business, Energy, and
Industrial Strategy) provides a foreword. This does not go beyond
indicating that Labour is determined to address climate change in an
equitable manner. She reaffirms Labour’s policy of net zero emissions
by 2050 and pledges Labour will ensure “60 per cent of the UK’s energy
comes from renewable and low carbon sources within twelve years of
coming to power.” This contradicts statements made elsewhere in the
document which said the 60% target applied only to electricity and
heat.

The single longest portion of the report is the introduction, which
makes it clear that this document is only a “briefing note”. A “full
report, to be published later in the year ... will set out our
intended pathways for upgrading the whole energy system, including
other electricity generation technologies, UK heating and our approach
for non-domestic buildings”. To date the full paper still does not
appear to have been published, but given Labour's haphazard way of
publishing and publicising its own policy documents it is difficult to
know for certain. The introduction goes on to claim that “Britain has
the best opportunities for renewable energy of almost any country in
the world” and explains that the current paper will look at “four key
elements” of Labour’s plans: energy efficiency, offshore wind, onshore
wind, and solar power.

Many short-term benefits of such a policy are described: eliminating
fuel poverty (and improved well-being that results), cleaner air,
eliminating “the obscene wastefulness of our current, high-polluting
energy system”, and energy security for “decades to come” with
protection from fluctuations in fuel prices. This will be achieved by
reducing heating demand by 23% and producing 85% of electricity and
44% of heat from renewable sources. Such actions are estimated to
create 410,000 jobs, will require massive infrastructure renewal, and
will affect “almost all [non-energy] sectors”. These steps will allow
the UK to meet its commitments under the Paris Agreement. We are
reassured that, despite the intermittency of wind and solar power,
“the lights will stay on” and that “this paper shows that even a
limited selection of the cost-effective technical solutions available
today would be more than sufficient” to do this.

The report proposes installing 4GW of new offshore wind capacity every
year through the 2020s, bringing the UK's total up to 52GW. This will
allow the UK to harness “the largest wind resource in Europe”, taking
advantage of falling costs and new technologies. It is mentioned that
offshore wind works well to offset lower solar power production in
winter. It is estimated that, by sourcing components from domestic
suppliers, this policy would result in the creation of 120,000
jobs. There is a further proposal to bring installed onshore wind
capacity to 30GW by 2030, taking advantage of cheaper building costs
than offshore wind and a “low footprint”. This is expected to create
an additional 60,000 jobs.

On solar power, the report suggests increasing installed capacity to
35GW by 2030, installing 2.2GW per year and creating 70,000 jobs. It
is noted that capacity has grown massively since 2010, despite a
slowdown due to “actions of the Tory government”. While installations
were initially small scale, it is noted that larger installations now
dominate.

Finally, it is proposed to cut domestic heat demand by about one
quarter by 2030 by upgrading buildings to the highest standards of
efficiency (as well as making non-energy related improvements), with
24 million homes upgraded by 2030. Higher energy standards will be
enforced for all new homes. In addition to addressing climate change,
this policy will improve energy poverty and quality of
life. Efficiency is noted as being vital to meet the 60% target, given
the large amount of heating currently used and difficulty in shifting
to renewable heat. This project will “require a scale of investment,
supply chain capacity building and innovation __as yet unseen in
post-war Britain__” (emphasis added) and would create 160,000 jobs.

### Problems

Though described as a summary, the above is a fairly complete
reproduction of the actual content present in this 14 page report. No
citations or arguments were given for any of the claims made. Given
how little information the document contained, it is unclear what it
was intended to achieve.

It is essential that we are told what sectors the 60% clean energy
target applies to. The manifesto simply pledged to “ensure that 60 per
cent of the UK’s energy comes from zero-carbon or renewable sources by
2030”, but this document (except the comments made by Rebecca
Long-Bailey) claims this referred only to electricity and
heating. However, together these make up less than half of current UK
energy consumption. If this is current policy then it represents a
massive retreat by Labour.

The relationship between “zero carbon” and “renewable” sources is also
unclear. The plans presented in this document are for 60% renewable
(electric and heating) energy by 2030. Is it intended that we should
take “zero carbon” to just be a synonym for “renewable”? If so, what
do we make of biomass which, while renewable, even the most generous
estimates show emitting some greenhouse gases.
([The IPPC](https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_annex-iii.pdf)
estimates 230gCO<sub>2</sub>/kWh, about 1/3 those from gas, but
[under certain circumstances](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2114993-europes-green-energy-policy-is-a-disaster-for-the-environment/)
it may be even worse than fossil fuels.) Jeremy Corbyn has indicated
that nuclear will also make up part of the zero-carbon energy
mix. Even existing reactors are not shown in this paper’s plans for
2030 (let alone the new ones Labour supposedly supports). Do the
authors not think we need them? Whatever one’s stance on nuclear
energy, Labour members deserve to know how it fits into climate change
plans.

If existing hydro and biomass capacity is included, then the proposed
new wind and solar installations would produce the promised amount of
renewable electricity. However, that’s only a small part of the
battle. The real challenge will be to achieve “system integration”,
allowing the lights to remain on when the wind isn’t blowing. These
problems are dismissed as easily solved, with no explanation of
how it would be done. It would probably be possible to do this for 60%
renewable electricity, but gas plants would be needed for
backup. Rather than just looking at the requirements for 60% renewable
energy, as this paper claims to do, we need to think about how we’ll
actually achieve 100% clean energy. Otherwise we could lock ourselves
into dependence on fossil fuels in the medium term.

No explanation is given of what will provide the 44% renewable
heat. Indeed, the term itself is not clear and is never
defined. Electricity and hydrogen are mentioned. However, all existing
and proposed renewable installations will be needed to meet targets
for existing electricity demand. Hydrogen takes energy to produce and
this is not budgeted for either.

There are a number of other issues I could also challenge this paper
on, but I will end here for reasons of space. As the authors say, we
urgently need a plan to address climate change. It is a shame,
therefore, that they have not provided us with one. Hopefully they
will do so in the full report (if it is ever published) but, if so, I
don’t see why this lightweight document was released.

Finally, we need to consider the way in which this report was
written. Of the 10 authors, Internet searching revealed details on 8 of
them. One of these is an academic researcher, another is a policy
analyst at Ofgem, and the rest are energy or climate change
consultants. All of the consultants work for the same company
(Arup). One of the remaining two may run a business installing solar
panels, but I’m not sure. All things considered, this seems like a
less-than-diverse pool of expertise. Why weren’t the unions involved?
What about people who work at power plants, build wind farms, or do
load balancing for National Grid? Even beyond exactly who was chosen
to write this report, given the weakness of its arguments and how
little effort was made to distribute it to members, it feels like
policy is being formed by small groups of leadership-appointed
experts. This is a far cry from the membership-led policy formation
which Jeremy Corbyn promised when he was elected leader.

### The Missing Ingredient: Politics

This report and, it seems, the full version of it which is to come,
deals with technical, rather than political questions. In and of
itself, this is fine; Labour needs to ensure its policies are grounded
in what is technologically feasible. However, we mustn't lose sight of
the political aspects of these issues, either. Political assumptions
inform the context in which technical discussions take place. For
example, anti-nuclear activists often argue that this technology only
receives consideration due to its compatibility with centralised
government and big business (not to mention its military
applications). Conversely, its few left wing supporters suggest that
nuclear power appears artificially expensive due to the high cost and
short-term thinking of private finance and can be built much more
cheaply in the public sector. The technical and political
are linked, forming a dialectic which we must navigate.

The most obvious case of missing politics is the paper's support for
rooftop solar panels. Their installation in uncritically treated as a
good thing, without any consideration of who benefits. To date this
has largely been well-off property owners, who've received a subsidy
paid for by other electricity consumers. Labour seems to want solar
panels to also be placed on rental property, which begs the question
of who will own them. It's hard to imagine how the tenant could be the
one to finance the panels, but if it's the landlord who's paying for them
then presumably it would also be the landlord receiving the government
subsidy (either directly or through increased rent). We thus see how
politics can very quickly infringe upon technical plans. Rather than
examine these issues, the paper ignores them.

As Labour continues its work on energy policy, it is vital that it
considers exactly how it wishes to organise ownership of the
sector. To date it seems to have endorsed a plurality of structures,
consisting of regional, local, personal, and cooperative ownership. I
have, in the past,
[criticised this approach](https://newsocialist.org.uk/ownership-and-markets-energy/)
as incapable of delivering the national-level planning that will be
necessary to build a low-carbon grid
and will not repeat myself here. However, even many proponents of such
a system often acknowledge the need to abolish the energy market and provide
some sort of national guidance. Yet we have been given no indication
of what form this might take, by Labour or anyone else.

Probably the closest this Labour document comes to truly considering
the political implications of its proposals is when it says about its
energy efficiency measures that "This level of ambition represents an
unprecedented transformation of the UK’s housing stock and will
require a scale of investment, supply chain capacity building and
innovation as yet unseen in post-war Britain". This is a fair
assessment, with the task becoming all the more massive when
considering the myriad other policies needed to address climate
change. In short, it would require something on the scale of war-time
economic planning. The problem is that, during the World Wars, the
government could rely on an alliance with business. While capital
might not have liked submitting to government control, it acknowledged
that this was necessary in order to win the war. As national capital
would not have fared well had Britain been on the losing side, they
had a fairly immediate interest in cooperating.

Unfortunately, the effects of climate change are sufficiently distant
and diffuse (not to mention, concentrated in the Global South) that
business is unlikely to see the need for such cooperation with public
planners today. This represents a formidable obstacle which, as far as
I'm aware, no one has really considered. I can not confidently propose
a solution to this, other than to say that clearly a
powerful working class movement, dedicated to an environmental
transition in the economy, will be necessary. Only such a popular
force can scare capital into acquiescence or (as I think will likely prove
necessary) actually begin to take democratic control of key economic
sectors.

Over the following series of articles, I will outline some of the
necessary technical elements of a strategy to address climate change
and suggest policies which a socialist government could use to achieve
these. By and large this will be focusing on what policies Labour
government can adopt at the national and (to a lesser extent) local
level, rather than the equally important grassroots mobilisation and
capacity building which must also occur. Where possible, I will
indicate where government policy could link up with grassroots
efforts. My first article in the series will focus on the concept of a
"Green New Deal", providing an overall strategy for decarbonisation
and examining how this requires cooperation across a wide range of
both sectors and scales. I will then focus on some key individual
sectors, including energy, transport, housing, and
food/agriculture. Finally (and perhaps most importantly), the
international dimensions of climate change will be considered.

