Title: No Limits on the Left
Date: 2016-09-27 01:00
Tags: UK, Labour, Corbyn, British Politics, Nuclear Weapons
Summary: Here's something you won't hear everyday: I'm to the left of Jeremy Corbyn. If you listened to much of the British media, you wouldn't think that's possible, given that the now twice-elected leader of the Labour Party is apparently a Lenin-loving, Hamas-hugging, business-bashing commie fiend dead-set on nationalising your children and making them go on strike in reopened coal mines. And yet, here I am, proudly nailing my colours to the mast, revealing them to being considerably redder than those of certain bearded brethren.

![The left-wing extremest/Leader of Her Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition]({filename}/images/JeremyCorbyn.jpg)

Here's something you won't hear everyday: I'm to the left of
[Jeremy Corbyn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeremy_Corbyn). If you
listened to much of the British media, you wouldn't think that's
possible, given that the now twice-elected leader of the Labour Party
is apparently a Lenin-loving, Hamas-hugging, business-bashing commie
fiend dead-set on nationalising your children and making them go on
strike in reopened coal mines. And yet, here I am, proudly nailing my
colours to the mast, revealing them to being considerably redder than
those of certain bearded Bolshevik.

In all seriousness, anyone who is actually paying attention to what
Corbyn has been saying and is being intellectually honest will have to
admit that his politics aren't _that_ radical. He's promised
significant public investment, a move away from fossil fuels, faster
Internet connections, stronger collective bargaining, and a number of
other extremely welcome measures under which Britain nonetheless remain
a firmly capitalism society. The only industry which he's promised to
nationalise is rail (which is so obviously sensible that even a
majority of Tory voters support it) and possibly portions of the bus
network. This barely scratches the surface of the nationalisations
overseen by
[Clem Attlee's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clement_Attlee) postwar
Labour government, let alone the sorts of proposals put forward by
[Tony Benn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Benn) (_de facto_
leader of the Labour Left) in the 1970s and '80s. This is not to say
that I don't think that, at heart, Corbyn is considerably more radical
than his policies suggest, but his actual platform is some way to the
right of what I'd like.

But I'm not writing this simply to moan about Corbyn being too
moderate or betraying his roots or anything like that. I get that he
is in a difficult position where he has to put forward policy which
can win elections, hold the Labour Party together, and successfully be
implemented without insurmountable resistance from the
[civil service](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yes_Minister) or
[military](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Very_British_Coup#Differences_between_novel_and_TV). At
some point compromises are going to be made and some of those are not
going to be ones which I'll find acceptable. A case in point is the
recent move of some of those around the leadership to
[get behind the renewal](https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/26/jeremy-corbyn-puts-aside-objections-to-renewing-trident)
of the Trident nuclear weapons[^1]. I get that this may be seen as a
necessary compromise if they are to pursue their agenda of
democratising the economy. At the same time, though, I __can not in
any way support__ any policy which would see tens, if not hundreds, of
billions of pounds spent on weapons of mass destruction. It would be
bad enough keeping the weapons if they were already built and just
sitting there, but it is utterly unconscionable to actually be
spending the money to build them yourself. Yes, the renewal will
likely be underway by the time Labour could hypothetically be elected,
but it will not be finished, will still be costing money, and could
still be stopped.

One of the problems we now face is that the Labour Party now has no
left wing. Most people would look at me very strangely indeed for
saying that, given that one of its most left wing MPs is now the
leader.  What I mean is that there is now no one to the left of the
leader who can hold him to account and act as the party's
conscience. Having an uncompromising left block in parliament is
important because it is able to act as a counterweight on the
leadership when it is under pressure from business, the civil service,
or the international community to abandon its goals. This is similar
to the problem experienced in places like Bolivia and
[Greece](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/08/panitch-greece-baltas-syriza-leadership-tsipras/)
where the most capable left-wing organisers ended up being drawn into
the state, with little capacity for independent organising left.

Ideally this could be a role played by the membership, or at least a
subset of it. However, most of the new members are left-progressive
types rather than hard-core socialists (let-alone the
[Trotskyists](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/08/watson-corbyn-red-scare-militant-trotskyists/)
that the media would have us believe no run the party). These are
people who would have voted
[Green](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Party_of_England_and_Wales)
or [Plaid Cymru](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plaid_Cymru) or
[SNP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scottish_National_Party) or even
[Lib-Dem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberal_Democrats) in previous
elections and are not familiar with the detailed socialist
analysis[^2] and why social democracy
[is not a long-term solution](|filename|/Politics/socDemDecline.md). I
don't mean to be condescending to these people, as socialists must be
able to reach out to them and convince them, but my point is that
quite a bit of work is required before much of the membership is
likely to be able to act as a significant counterweight to right-wing
pressure on the leadership. The fact that much of the politics of
these new members seems to be based around supporting Corbyn will also
make it more difficult for them to apply pressure on him when
necessary.

Many of the left-wing currents within labour are not helping with
this. While they could be staking out a space to develop the left
policy they want, without having to worry so much about not
antagonising the Labour Right, instead their approach seems to be to
provide uncritical support to the leadership and its policies. The
[Jeremy Corbyn for PM](https://www.facebook.com/JeremyCorbyn4PM/)
Facebook page seems to consist mainly of praising whatever the
leadership says, while [Momentum](http://www.peoplesmomentum.com/) has
been little more than a Jeremy Corbyn fan club. Both display a
slightly revolting level of sycophancy and hero-worship.

This must not continue. We on the left must not be afraid to publicly
disagree with the leadership if they are doing something which we
consider to be wrong. Motions should be put forward to conference
calling for more radical actions than Corbyn has been willing to
discuss so far. I'm not saying that we should just propose whatever we
want, regardless of its practicality or ability to get traction with
the electorate. There's no point trying to get a demand for collective
ownership of the means of production and distribution into the next
Labour manifesto[^3] or to propose budgets using misleading
figures. We still need to consider what is achievable, but if our
opinion on this differs from that of the leadership (as mine does in
many cases) then we should not be afraid to say so.

Jeremy Corbyn's positions should not represent the limit of left wing
policy.


[^1]: The reference to NATO a collectivist, internationalist organisation during this speech also really took the cake.

[^2]: By which I mean a [materialist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historical_materialism) approach to history and society, with all that this entails. 

[^3]: But stating this as a long term goal in the [party constitution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clause_IV), on the other hand...
