Title: The P Word
Date: 2013-07-09 10:30
Tags: Socialism, Economic Planning, Competition, Markets, Oligopolies
Summary:
status: draft

Few ideas have been discredited in the popular mind as much as economic
planning. Mentioning it brings up images of the Soviet GOSPLAN and its huge
bureaucracy. The idea of a planned economy is viewed as synonymous with a
command economy and totalitarianism. Of course, it is unsurprising to here such
sentiments from the Right--they have long been opposed to any democratic
steering of the economy (unless by democracy you mean super-rich share-holders).
But it is somewhat more surprising coming from the Left.

To be sure, Left opposition to planning isn't anything like as virulent as that
of the Right: the Left is all for planning the delivery of social services, for
an industrial development strategy, even planning how we'll adapt our
infrastructure to deal with climate change. But hardly anyone on the Left seems
to want to talk about planning anything other than a few individual sectors.
Even when bank nationalisation is mentioned (as it is by many parliamentary Left
parties in Europe) the extent of democratic planning that seems to be envisioned
is little more than preferential lending to small green business. Most
socialists seem to be quite content with the prospect of a few nationalised
industries (often fewer than existed under social democracy) surrounded by a
chaotic mixture of co-ops and small businesses. While I tend to believe that
such a system would be superior to what we have now, I can't help feeling that
we should be aiming higher than that.

You may be wondering what I have against small businesses and co-ops. In the
case of small business, my objection is that its operations are usually no more
democratic than those of large enterprises. Additionally, small businesses often
don't pay their workers very well, do not offer much in the way of benefits, and
aren't unionised. What's more, small business owners are often very
conservative; if you want virulent right-wing rhetoric, look no further than the
Canadian Federation of Independent Business. So, with the exception of family
businesses and self-employment (where the only exploitation would be
self-exploitation), I have serious issues with these institutions.

My objection to co-ops is more nuanced. There are actually many areas of the
economy where I think co-ops are appropriate. For example, I see little point in
public ownership of restaurants, cafes, and bakeries. A worker's co-op (when
these businesses can't be run by a family or an individual) would be the logical
organizational choice. And obviously it is vitally important in a democratic
society that there be multiple independent media outlets. I, like most leftists
am not terribly fond of corporately-owned media, but I would be even more
opposed to a government media monopoly. So, while I wholeheartedly support a
well-funded public broadcaster, I think that the best way to run most media
would be via cooperative ownership, either by journalists or by subscribers.
But there is much of the economy in which I don't think co-ops provide the best
approach. There are a few reasons for this. One is that co-ops will often
function in much the same way as a normal business. If it is a worker's co-op
then the emphasis will be on greatest profit for the workers, possibly at the
expense of the consumers. If it is a consumer's co-op then the emphasis will
often be on the lowest possible prices, even if this means exploiting the
workers. That's not to say that co-ops aren't better than traditional
enterprises (I think they are), merely to say that there are often practical
limits to how much better they can be. Additionally, having workers' co-ops
(which tend to be the type that receive the most attention from the left) that
compete against each other is probably one of the surest ways to destroy
solidarity, because employees of competing firms will see each other as rivals
rather than comrades. Business unionism has already caused this to be a problem
to some extent and I fear that workers' co-ops have the potential to make it
worse. Most importantly, though, there are a great many sectors in which the
decisions being made will effect everyone's lives and, in those situations,
everyone should be able to have some degree of say in the decisions. Examples
that come to mind are utilities, natural resources (after all, they belong to
the whole country, don't they?), health care, transportation, education, and
banking. Most Leftists would agree that some or all of these sectors should be
under public ownership.

However, I would take that farther: I think that any sector which provides a
foundation for the functioning of the broader economy should be publicly owned.
Furthermore, there are many sectors in which public ownership would be
strategically valuable. Because these industries effect the overall shape of the
economy, everyone must be able to have democratic influence over them. As things
currently stand, the only way I see this being possible over extended time
periods is via public ownership.
This is where I begin to disagree with many socialists, who view extensive
public ownership with (at best) ambivalence. In this, I believe, they have
internalized neoliberalism's demonisation of the public sector. To be fair, past
experiences with nationalisation have been decidedly mixed, with most publicly
owned companies behaving little better than their private sector counterparts--
except with a bit of extra bureaucracy thrown in for good measure. However, I
see no reason why we can't incorporate some of the most liberating elements of
cooperatives (such as worker self-management and consumer representation on the
board of diercters) into public enterprise. Too paraphrase a concept from the
Green Party of Saskatchewan, we should turn Crown Corporations into Crown
Co-ops.

Market socialists will point out that competition is vitally important in
order to ensure a functional economy. They're not entirely wrong as competition
_can_ be good for the consumer. However, it tends to be quite bad for workers,
squeezing their wages. Additionally, it is unclear how much competition can
really be sustained in the commanding heights of the economy. In many sectors
what we have now is just an oligopoly. Just look at Canada's telecom market for
example: in any given location there are rarely more than two ISPs. Or consider
that Canada only has two and a half airlines (Porter is so small that it doesn't
deserve to be fully counted as a third) to choose from. And let's not even get
into the near monopolies held by Internet companies such as Google and Facebook.
When you think about it, do we really want that much competition? A striking,
although not necessarily relevant, example is in social networking websites and
VoIP services (eg: Skype)--it would kind of defeat the purpose if people were
evenly spread across ten different ones! Similarly, I would much rather that
Canada was served by a single well-run airline which could offer increased
flexibility in choosing connecting flights and, hopefully, seamless rail
connections, then the semi-monopolistic system we have now. I would prefer that
there was one reasonably priced telecom provider from which I could get a
land-line, a broadband Internet connection, a cellphone plan, and cable
television--it would be a lot more convenient than having to compare a bunch of
small wireless providers for your cell-phone and then choose between whichever
over-priced company will provide the rest of your telecom services in your area.
What's more, people seem to have forgotten about the economy of scale; sometimes
(although by no means always) there are savings that can be achieved via
centralisation of an industry. Seeing as this would produce a monopoly, the only
acceptable way to achieve such centralisation would be in the hands of a
democratic state.

One particular advantage of this would be that it allows for coordination
between different industries. This isn't really such a radical idea, considering
that vertical integration is a tried-and-true technique used in the private
sector. There is no reason not to apply this to the public sector as well. Let's
develop and example using some of the old Canadian Crown Corporations. It would
have been logical for Air Canada to buy its planes from Canadair and its fuel
from Petro Canada. Canadair could have bought its steel from the nationalised
steel mills in Cape Breton and its rubber from Polymer Corporation. This could have
been shipped using Canadian National Railways, whose trains would also run on
fuel from Petro Canada. When any documents needed to be sent by these companies,
they could use Canada Post, rather than a private courier. Any transactions
between Crown Corporations could be done at-cost, ultimately reducing the price
of the commodity people actually consume: air travel in this case. To what
extent such public sector integration was ever achieved, I do not know. It
might have been quite extensive, it might have been nonexistent. I'm not even
sure how I would begin to find out. And, to be fair, this might not have
actually improved efficiency--it might have just increased the size of the
bureaucracy. Under the traditional model of public ownership this may well have
been the result.

But let's face it: the traditional model of public ownership did _not_ put any
particular emphasis on long-term planning, democratic or otherwise. What's more,
any attempt at reviving the idea of public ownership must be squarely opposed to
bureaucracy, which only gets in the way of democracy. How best to acheive this?
Well, that's a good question and it will not doubt take some trial-and-error to
discover the answer. However, a few suggestions come to mind:
- Place day-to-day management of each workplace under the control of the
employees.
- Consider a scheme in which workplaces which manage to increase their
productivity and efficiency would receive part of these savings as a bonus to
the employees.
- Use computers to handle administration of and transactions between enterprises
as much as possible. Computers can help in the fight against the bureaucrats.
- There should be elected representatives of the workers on the board of
directors of all enterprises.
- There should be a representative of any industry that buys an enterprise's
outputs on the board of directors.
- Determine some way to ensure that a portion of the board of directors of each
enterprise is elected from broader society, without overwhelming people with
voting (this is a tricky one).
- Try public ownership at different levels of government. While railways are
probably best left to national ownership, inter-city buses would likely operate
better from the provincial level, for example. Industries which are not,
strictly speaking, part of the commanding heights of the economy might be best
owned at the municipal level.

Needless to say, the extensive public ownership which I am proposing makes a
conventional market virtually impossible within large segments of the economy.
This leaves little choice other than economic planning. How best to go about it?
Is it even possible? After all, the USSR's economy is now known to have been
a hopeless mess. There were frequent shortages of things that no one had ever
realised were necessities until they couldn't get them. There are stories of
producing the specified number of pants, for example, only to find that there
were not enough zippers to put in them. Such stories are frequently used to
criticise public ownership. Goodness knows, there were certainly issues with
these things even in the West. British Steel was an inefficient, lumbering,
old-fashioned, over-staffed wreck when dear old Maggie came into office, for
example (although the National Coal Board wasn't nearly as bad as most people
make out). So how can we effectively plan while ensuring that such situations
do not arise again?

I think there are two big problems with previous attempts at planning for
public enterprise. One is that such planning was too centralised. Yes, I know
that I said there are advantages of centralisation. This is true. However, I
very much doubt that such advantages extend into the world of planning; it would
be essentially impossible for a central planner to be able to know the needs of
every community in an entire country. A better technique would be to let each
community work out their needs for themselves, and then pass the information
up to a centralised coordinator. Call this process "decentralised planning," if
you will. The second problem faced by previous planners is that they did not use
computers. Many of them can not be blamed for this, as it probably wasn't until
the '70s or '80s that computers became advanced enough to be useful. It is
frankly amazing that the Eastern Bloc countries were able to run planned
economies for as long as they did without using computers. Computers would allow
for information to be rapidly and conveniently passed through the economy.
Enterprises cou

